(79-364) The Birth of Modern Childbirth, 1600 to the Present
(A4 Mini, Spring 2017, 6 units)
Tuesday & Thursday, 9:00-10:20 (Cyert Hall A70)
Dr. Katie Walsh
kpwalsh@andrew.cmu.edu
Cyert Hall 120

Office Hours:
Tuesdays, 10:30-11:30
Wednesdays, 1:30-2:30
By appointment

Course Description
At-home births, epidurals, and C-sections: women’s experiences with childbirth vary widely. Many
of these differing experiences stem from societal developments that occurred in Europe during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Amidst these changes, the ritual of childbirth was
transformed. Women went from giving birth at home with a midwife, surrounded by female friends
and relatives, to giving birth in a hospital with male practitioners. This transformation was never
unilateral or complete. Women today continue to experience aspects of an at-home birth in a
twenty-first century hospital. This course will examine the varied ways that this transformation has
unfolded in the United States and Britain from 1600 to the Present.
Throughout this course, we will use primary sources to examine the historical arguments
pertaining to three central questions: 1.) where should women give birth? 2.) with whom should
women give birth? and 3.) how should women give birth? Students will use these arguments to
identify significant historical trends and agents of change, and ultimately to develop an informed
perspective on the transformation(s) of childbirth. Student performance in the course will be
assessed using various types of written assignments (online posts, online discussion boards, final
paper), in-class discussion, and an oral presentation. This course has no prerequisites, and aims to
bring together students from a wide variety of academic disciplines.
Required Texts
I have created an online course reserves site through Hunt Library. A link to this site will be posted
on our Canvas course site. Please notify me if you are unable to access any of the assigned materials.
In addition to the assigned readings, you will be asked to locate and read primary sources using
databases accessible through CMU’s Hunt Library. Again, links to these databases will be provided
through Canvas.
Learning Objectives
Summarize and compare historical perspectives of the birthing
process, especially in regards to our three central questions: with
whom should women give birth, where should women give birth,
and how should women give birth.
Identify and describe significant agents of change in the
transformation(s) of childbirth, including but not limited to

Accompanying
Assessments
Online posts, in-class
discussion, perspective
paper/proposal/presentation
Online posts, in-class
discussion, perspective

1

childbirth practitioners, prevailing ideologies, governmental
structures, and other societal factors.

paper/proposal/presentation

Analyze significant trends or transformations in the history of
childbirth using primary and secondary sources.

Online posts, in-class
discussion, perspective
paper/proposal/presentation

Integrate primary and secondary sources to develop an historical
perspective (i.e., measuring/describing change over time) about
with whom and where women should give birth.

Perspective
paper/proposal/presentation

Find and interpret primary sources that support, refute, or extend
historical arguments that pertain to the history of childbirth.

All graded components

Final Grade Breakdown
Graded Component

Point Value

Percentage of Final Grade

Discussion Board Posts (10 @ 3 pts each)

30 points

16%

Online Reflection Posts (5 @ 10 pts each)

50 points

26%

Reflection Post Comments (5 @ 3 pts each)

15 points

8%

Perspective Paper Proposal
Due: 4/11

10 points

5%

Perspective Paper
Due: 5/9

40 points

21%

Perspective Paper Presentation
Due: 4/18

20 points

11%

In-Class Discussion (12 @ 2 pts each)

24 points

13%

189 points

100%

TOTAL

Grading Scale
Your course assignments as well as your final grade will be determined based on the following
grading scale:
A

90-100%

B

80-89%

C

70-79%

D

60-69%

2

R

59% and below

Graded Components
Discussion Board Posts
Discussion board posts are an opportunity for you to influence and shape our in-class discussion by
raising questions or considerations from the assigned readings. Each day’s class will have a
separate discussion thread on Canvas, and you should post your response by 8PM every Monday
and Wednesday night (i.e., the night before our class meets). I will notify you of any changes to
this schedule. Everyone is responsible for making one post per class session. If you’d like to make
additional posts, please feel free. You are welcome to comment on your classmates’ posts, though
this is not required. We will use the questions and considerations raised on the discussion board to
help generate and advance our in-class discussion.
Unless otherwise specified, the content of your post should raise an issue from that day’s assigned
readings that you would like to discuss in class. I’ve listed several post prompts below, but feel free
to generate your own ideas as well.
● “This article/book seems to connect to a previous article/book that we’ve read in the following
ways. . . .”
● “The information presented in this article/book seems very similar or different to something
else we’ve read, and here’s how. . .”
● “This topic/issue/reading seems especially relevant to historical transformations of childbirth
because. . .”
● “I don’t understand or agree with the author’s argument about _______ because. . .”
Reflection Posts & Comments
Our Canvas site will feature a separate “reflection” discussion board. This discussion board is a
place for you to reflect on the week’s readings and in-class discussions. Additionally, this is a place
for you to start building your perspective paper. Unless otherwise specified, online posts are due
every Saturday by 8PM. Each online post should be approximately 500 words and address the
central question of the week (i.e., where should women give birth, with whom should women give
birth, how should women give birth). You will complete five reflection posts, and there will be a
separate Canvas thread for each of these posts.
Within the context of the central question, your post should include the following:
● A brief summary of the historical arguments presented that week
● An historical example (i.e., from a primary source) from a CMU-supported online database
that supports, refutes, or extends one of the historical arguments raised in the reading. Your
post should include a description of the primary source that you used as well as your
interpretation of the source (i.e., what is it saying and how does that pertain to our course?).
● At least one question that you would like to explore further pertaining to the arguments
addressed in your post.
When it comes to finding a primary source in a CMU-supported online database, you can choose to
search for a particular source (e.g., one mentioned in one of the assigned secondary sources) or you
might choose to search for particular key words (e.g., “midwives”) and then see what turns up. You
can limit your search by time period, and you should consider whether you want to stay within the
time period we are discussing or go outside of it. If you go outside of it, consider that you may be
unaware of the historical context for understanding it. The decision is yours! Remember that you
must make a connection between the source your find and the arguments we’ve discussed in class.
3

In addition to writing your own post, you will comment on at least two of your classmates’ posts.
You will be organized into groups of five, and each week you are responsible for commenting on at
least two of your group members’ posts. You are welcome to view and comment on other posts
outside of your group, but this is not required. Remember: these posts are opportunities for you to
discover additional primary sources that you can use in your final paper, so make as much use of
them as possible. These comments are due every Sunday by 8PM. While there is no word-limit
requirement to your comments, they should demonstrate a significant level of engagement with
your classmates’ posts. Some ways in which you could choose to engage with your classmates’ posts
are:
• Discuss how your classmates’ primary source connects with a primary source that you’ve
found.
• Ask a question that your classmates’ posts raise for you.
• Supplement your classmates’ summary of the historical arguments from that week.
You will receive feedback from me on your online posts via our Canvas coursesite. Each week, I will
likely select 1-2 of the primary sources you find to discuss during class.
Historical Perspective Proposal, Paper, and Presentation
The perspective paper is an opportunity for you to synthesize two of our questions: with whom and
where should women give birth? This synthesis will include additional primary sources, and aims
to measure/describe change over time. Your weekly online posts are smaller versions of this
assignment, and you may draw on your posts and your classmates’ online posts in constructing
your paper. You can essentially treat the online posts as a way of crowdsourcing primary sources
for your final paper. In your final paper, you should:
● Describe significant changes/trends to the historical responses to the two central questions.
● Discuss key historical arguments that respond to the two central questions (e.g., women should
deliver with a midwife because _____).
● Identify factors or agents that influenced these changes/trends in these responses.
● Use at least five additional primary sources (i.e., ones that are not part of your regularly
assigned readings) as evidence of the trend/change you identify. Only three of these additional
sources can come from online posts; two of the sources must be “new” for the final paper. Your
proposal should also include citations of secondary sources since they provide the framework
for your primary sources.
● Discuss how you have implemented feedback you’ve received on your proposal and/or
presentation.
You will submit a brief proposal (750-1000 words) of you paper by the beginning of class on April
11th. This proposal should include an identification of most of the key arguments and patterns that
you will discuss in your final paper. Additionally, your proposal should describe at least two of the
primary sources you will include in your final paper. You will receive feedback on these proposals
from myself and your classmates and you should use this feedback in further developing your
historical perspective paper.
In addition to your final paper, you will create a 5-minute presentation that summarizes your
paper’s key points, including brief descriptions of the primary sources you intend to use. There is
tremendous value in being able to explain your work in a concise, digestible manner, and this
presentation aims to accomplish that goal. You may also find that thinking about your presentation
helps you better articulate the ideas in your perspective paper. You will present your paper to the
class on either April 18, and your classmates and I will provide you with feedback for you to
4

consider when writing your final draft. In other words, these presentations are a “rough draft” of
your final paper. I encourage you to use the feedback that you receive during these session to
further revise your paper before you submit the final version (approx. 8-10 pages, doublespaced) by noon on May 9th. Your final paper should include a Works Cited page, the all sources
(primary and secondary) should be cited in your paper. Additional information about citations will
be discussed during class.
In-Class Participation
Class discussion is an essential part of our course. It’s an opportunity for you to practice
synthesizing ideas from the assigned readings, and to participate in a dialogue with people who are
thinking about a similar topic. Given the wide variety of backgrounds represented in our class, I
trust that our class discussions will generate many questions and represent diverse perspectives.
Your in-class contributions will be assessed daily on the on a two-point scale:
● 0 = absent
● 1 = present but not respectfully participating in class discussion or small-group activities
(e.g., dominating class discussion, distracting yourself and other students with or without
the use of a mobile device, not participating in class discussion, etc.)
● 2 = present and respectfully participating in class discussion and small-group activities
Level 2 participation does not merely consist of “talking a lot.” It also involves listening to your
classmates, engaging with their ideas, and asking questions of them and me. When we break into
small groups during class, an active participant ensures that the group stays on-topic, allows for
participation from everyone in the group, and works to develop a deliverable (if applicable). During
week 3 of the course, you’ll be given a participation check-in (i.e., how am I doing so far?) on your
class participation. This check-in allows you the opportunity to receive feedback and improve upon
your class participation. Given that our class only meets for 7 weeks, attendance at every class
session is required and essential to success in the course.
Course Policies
Flex Days/Late Work
Due dates for every assignment are provided on the course syllabus and course schedule (and
posted in Canvas). Unless otherwise stated, assignments are due on those days. However, I
recognize that sometimes “life happens.” In these instances, you may use your allotted two flex
days. These days allow you to submit an assignment up to two days late without penalty. You can
use these days for any assignment and for any reason. You do not need to provide me with the
reason: simply email me and tell me how many of your flex days you would like to use.
Once you’ve exhausted your flex days, then point deductions will occur for any assignment
submitted after the deadline. An assignment submitted 24 hours of the due date will only be
eligible for 80% of the maximum number of point allotted. Assignments submitted more
than 24 hours after the due date will not be accepted. If you experience extenuating
circumstances (e.g., you are hospitalized) that prohibit you from submitting your assignments on
time, please let me know. I will evaluate these instances on a case-by-case basis.
Re-grade Policy
If you would like me to review a graded assignment, I am more than willing to do so. All requests
for re-grades must be submitted within one week of the graded assignments being returned.
After requesting a re-grade, please schedule an appointment with me to discuss your assignment
and grade. Please allow me a minimum of 48 hours between your request for a re-grade and our
meeting. Exceptions to this policy may apply in the case of the final perspective paper due to
5

deadlines for CMU grade submissions.
Attendance and Participation
Within the first week of our course, please look ahead and see if you need to miss class for any
excusable reason (religious observance, job interview, university-sanctioned event, etc.) and notify
me as soon as possible. We may be able to make alternative arrangements for completing
assignments. Everyone is permitted one absence without the deduction of points. If you do not
use this absence, then the extra points you earn will be added to your lowest score when computing
your final grade (i.e., extra credit). If there are extenuating circumstances that require you to miss
more than one class session, please come and discuss this issue with me in advance of your
absence(s).
Learning Accommodations
If you have a disability and require accommodations, please contact Catherine Getchell, Director of
Disability Resources at getchell@cmu.edu or 412-268-6121. If you have an accommodations letter
from the Disability Resources office, I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs
with me as early in the semester as possible. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations
are provided as appropriate.
Mobile Devices
Unless explicitly asked to use mobile devices, please refrain from using them during our class
sessions. The majority of our sessions will consist of class discussion and various content-related
activities that do not require mobile devices. Research shows that mobile devices not only distract
the user but also those within view of the mobile device. Additionally, research also shows that
students gain a better conceptual understanding of course material when they take longhand notes
(i.e., with pen and paper) rather than on a laptop. [Sana et al. (2013). “Laptop multitasking hinders
classroom learning for both users and nearby peers. Computers & Education 62: 24-31; Mueller and
Oppenheimer (2014). “The pen is mightier than the keyboard: advantages of longhand over laptop
note taking” Psychological Science 25(6): 1159-1168.]
Academic Integrity
Any work that you submit should be your own work (i.e., not borrowed/copied from any other
source, including our assigned readings and your classmates). When using other people’s ideas to
substantiate your own, please properly cite the original source. We will review proper citation
procedures in class, and you should ask for clarification whenever needed. I encourage you to rely
on your classmates’ online posts posts – especially their primary sources – when writing your final
paper, but you should be expressing your own ideas and not theirs.
Any act of cheating or plagiarism will be treated in accordance with Carnegie Mellon’s Policy on
Academic Integrity, which can be found here: http://www.cmu.edu/policies/student-and-studentlife/academic-integrity.html. Depending upon the individual violation, students could face penalties
ranging from failing the assignment to failing the class.
Units and Quality Points
Carnegie Mellon has adopted the method of assigning a number of “units” for each course to
represent the quantity of work required of students. For the average student, one unit represents
one work-hour of time per week throughout the semester. The number of units in each course is
fixed by the faculty member in consultation with the college offering the course. Three units are the
equivalent of one traditional semester credit hour.

6

Hence, a 9 unit semester-long course should require 9 hours of student engagement, on average,
including class time; if the instructor requires 3 hours of lecture and 1 hour of recitation, they can
expect students to spend 5 hours outside of class engaging in class work. For mini courses that run
for only seven weeks, the conversion from units to number of hours per week during the mini
involves multiplying by 2. For example, a 6 unit mini course should on average involve 12
hours of student engagement; if the instructor requires 3 hours of lecture and 3 hours of lab, they
can expect the students to spend 6 hours outside of class.
Take care of yourself
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
and alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking time to relax. Despite what you might hear, using your
time to take care of yourself will actually help you achieve your academic goals more than spending
too much time studying.
All of us benefit from support and guidance during times of struggle. There are many helpful
resources available on campus. An important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Take the time to learn about all that’s available and take advantage of it. Ask for support
sooner rather than later – this always helps.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or difficult feelings
like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Consider reaching out to a
friend, faculty or family member you trust for assistance connecting to the support that can help.
Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) is here for you: call 412-268-2922 and visit their
website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Over 25% of students reach out to CaPS some time
during their time at CMU.
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal, call someone immediately, day or night:
CaPS: 412-268-2922
Resolve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226
If the situation is life threatening, call the Police:
On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323
Off campus: 911

7

COURSE SCHEDULE
The readings listed for each day are those that we will be discussing that day. Therefore, you should
complete the readings before coming to class (i.e., the readings listed for each day are due at the
start of that day’s class).
With Whom Should Women Give Birth?
Date
3/21
Time Period:
1600-1800

Assignments and Events
•
•

Class, course, and Canvas introductions
Jane Sharp, The Midwives Book. Or the whole Art of Midwifery Discovered
(London, 1671). Book I, “The Introduction”

Topics:
Midwives, male practitioners, women’s experiences in childbirth, introduction to
“ceremony of childbirth”
3/23

Time Period:
1600-1800

***Librarian Sue Collins will visit class and introduce us to databases you can use
to complete your weekly reflection posts and final paper.
To prepare for class, please read
Secondary Sources
• Adrian Wilson, ‘The ceremony of childbirth an its interpretation’ in
Valerie Fildes (ed.) Women as Mothers in Pre-Industrial England: Essays in
Memory of Dorothy McLaren (London: Routledge, 1990): 68-107
(especially pp. 68-88).
• Katharine Walsh, ‘Marketing Midwives in Seventeenth-Century London: A
Re-examination of Jane Sharp’s The Midwives Book’ in Gender & History
26:2 (2014): 223-241.
Primary/Secondary Sources
• Laura Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based
on Her Diary, 1785-1812 (New York: Vintage Books, 1990), Chapter 5
(especially pp. 162-183)
• William Smellie [1769] A Collection of Preternatural Cases and
Observations in Midwifery. Vol. 3, “Collection XLIX”, pp. 482-493
Topics: “ceremony of childbirth” in London and Maine, man-midwives v.
midwives
Before next class
• Online Reflection Posts Post 1 due 3/25 by 8PM
• Comments on reflection online posts posts due 3/26 by 8PM

8

3/28

To prepare for class, please read
Secondary Sources
• Alison Nuttall, “Midwifery, 1800-1920: The Journey to Registration”
(Chapter 6) in Nursing and Midwifery in Britain since 1700, eds. Anne
Borsay and Billie Hunter (London: Palgrave McMillan, 2012).
• Marie Jenkins Schwartz, Birthing a Slave: Motherhood and Medicine in the
Antebellum South (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006),
Introduction and Chapter 5 (especially pp. 143-162)

Time Period:
1800-1920s

Primary Sources/Secondary Sources
• Margaret Llewelyn Davies (ed.), Maternity: Letters from Working Women
(New York: W.W. Norton, 1978)[selections]. Read letters #40, 62, 99, and
144.
• Pat Jalland, Women, Marriage and Politics: 1860-1914 (Oxford: Clarendon,
1986), Chapter 5 (especially pp. 143-149 “confinement”).
• Julius Levy, “Maternal Mortality and Mortality in the First Month of Life in
Relation to Attendant at Birth” in American Journal of Public Health 13
(February 1923): 88-95. (From The American Midwife Debate: A
Sourcebook on Its Modern Origins, ed. Judy Barrett Litoff (New York:
Greenwood Press, 1986).
Topics: (male) general practitioners in 19th-century U.S., “granny midwives”,
professionalization of midwives in England, mothers’ experiences in childbirth
(working class, upper class, enslaved), infant and maternal mortality rates in U.S.
and England

3/30

Time Period:
1930-1970s

To prepare for class, please read
Secondary Sources
• Tania McIntosh, A Social History of Maternity and Childbirth: Key Themes
in Maternity Care (London: Routledge, 2012), Chapter 4
Primary/Secondary Sources
• Mary Breckinridge, Wide Neighborhoods: A Story of the Frontier Nursing
Service (Lexington, KY: The University of Kentucky Press, 1952), Chapter
31
• “Frontier Nursing Service Brings Health to Kentucky Mountaineers” in
Life 2, no. 24 (14 June 1937).
• Paul de Kruif, “Forgotten Mothers” in The Ladies’ Home Journal 53
(December 1936)
Topics: district midwives in London, obstetricians, nurse-midwives in the U.S.
and England, maternity experiences in U.S. (rural and urban environments)
Before next class
• Online Reflection Posts Post 2 due 4/1 by 8PM
• Comments on reflection online posts due 4/2 by 8PM

9

***April 3 @ 3:30 - Silvia Federici (Hofstra University) talk “Feminism and the
Politics of the Commons in an Era of Primitive Accumulation”

Where Should Women Give Birth?
Date
4/4
Time Period:
1750-1930s

Assignments and Events
Secondary Sources
• Lara Marks, “Mothers, babies, and hospitals: ‘The London’ and the
provision of maternity care in East London, 1870-1939” in Lara Marks
and Hilary Marland (eds.), Women and Children First: International
Maternal and Infant Welfare, 1870-1945, (London: Routledge, 1992).
• Judith Leavitt, Brought to Bed: Childbearing in America 1750-1950 (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1986), Chapter 7
Primary Sources
• An Account of the Middlesex Hospital, for the Reception of Sick and Lame,
and for Lying-in Married Women, in Windmill-Street, Tottenham-Court
Road (London, 1761)
• “Rats in the Hospital”, Harper’s Weekly 4 (1860)
• Ann Rivington, “Motherhood – Third Class” American Mercury (Feb. 1934)
and “Motherhood – Third Class – A Reply” American Mercury (April 1934)
• Royal College of Midwives, “The Midwife’s Tale Oral History Collection
Videos” [Esther Silverton 2 and Alice Forrest]
Topics: early lying-in hospitals in the U.S. and England, hospital births for the
“rich” and the “poor”

4/6

Time Period:
1950-1980

Secondary Sources
• Angela Davis. Modern Motherhood: Women and Family in England, x. 19452000 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2012), Chapter 4
• Angela Danzi, From Home to Hospital: Jewish and Italian American Women
and Childbirth, 1920-1940, Chapter 6
Secondary/Primary Sources
• M.F. Ashley Montagu, “Babies Should be Born at Home!” Ladies Home
Journal (August 1955)
• Edward Cope and M. Margaret Gimblett. “Home Birth or Hospital?” The
Times (London, Feb. 12, 1960)
• “Choice in the Maternity Service” (London, June 1, 1964)
Topics: increased hospital birth
Before next class
• Online Reflection Posts Post 3 due 4/8 by 8PM
• Comments on reflection online posts posts due 4/9 by 8PM

10

4/11

•
•

Perspective Paper Proposals due (in-class peer review)
ECF-FG from Eberly Center (Megan Sanders)

4/13

Secondary/Primary Sources
• MacDorman, Marian et al. (2012). “Home Births in the United States,
1990-2009”. NCHS Data Brief, no. 84 (Jan. 2012)
• Beverly Beech (2012), “The benefits of home birth: evidence of safety,
effectiveness and women’s experiences”. Occasional paper for Association
Time Period:
for Improvements in the Maternity Services (AIMS)
1980-Present
• YouTube video, “Home Births on the Rise Across U.S.: Ricki Lake Weighs
in on Women’s Health Trend” (ABC News)
• Pam Belluck, “As Home Births Grow in the U.S., a New Study Examines the
Risks” The New York Times (Dec. 30, 2015)
Primary Sources
• Jenny Woolf, “So hard to escape the maternity ward’s conveyor belt” The
Times (London, England) 1980.
Topics: the backlash against hospital births
Before next class
• Online Reflection Posts Post 4 due 4/15 by 8PM
• Comments on reflection online posts posts due 4/16 by 8PM

Date

Assignments and Events

4/18

Perspective Paper Presentations

4/20

NO CLASS (SPRING CARNIVAL)
Before next class
• By 8PM on 4/22, please post a question (on our Canvas Discussion Board)
that you would like to ask our panelists on 4/25.

How Should Women Give Birth?
Date
4/25
Time Period:
Present Day

Assignments and Events
***In-class panel discussion with Julie Mckechnie, CNM, MSN, and Sheila
Ramgopal, MD
To prepare for class, please review [specific sections TBA]:
• "Midwifery Evidence-Based Practice" (American College of NurseMidwives)
• "Certification and Procedural Credentialing" (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists)
• "Joint Statement on Practice Relations" (American College of

11

Obstetricians and Gynecologists)
4/27

Secondary Sources
• Donald Caton, What a Blessing She Had Chloroform: The Medical and
Social Response to the Pain of Childbirth from 1800 to the Present (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999), Chapters 8
• Steve Ainsworth, “Upfront: the Birth of the Epidural” (Royal College of
Midwives website)
Primary Source
• “Twilight Sleep Is a Subject of a New Investigation” New York Times
(January 31, 1915)
Topics: pain relief in childbirth (Twilight sleep and epidurals)
Before next class
• Online Reflection Posts Post 5 due 5/1 by 9AM
• Comments on reflection online posts posts due 5/2 by 9AM

5/2

Secondary Sources
• Sally Curtin et al. (2015). “Maternal Morbidity for Vaginal and Cesarean
Deliveries, According to Previous Cesarean History: New Data from the
Birth Certificate, 2013” National Vital Statistics Reports 64, no. 4 [U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention]
• Sky Dylan-Robbins, “Video: An Unnecessary Cut?” The New Yorker (July
23, 2014)
• Judith Walzer Leavitt, Make Room for Daddy: the Journey from Waiting
Room to Birthing Room (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
Press, 2009)
• (optional) “Cesarean Section – A Brief History”, Parts 1-4 (U.S. National
Library of Medicine website)
Topics: epidurals, Lamaze, and Caesarean sections, and “students’ choice”
Before next class:
• By 9AM on 5/3, please post a question (on our Canvas Discussion Board)
that you would like to ask our panelists on 5/4.

5/4

***In-class panel discussion with Ruth Mankoff, CNM, and Ann McCarthy, CNM,
MSN, and Jatolloa Davis, CNM, MSN.

Time Period:
Present Day

To prepare for class, please review:
• The Midwife Center for Birth & Women’s Health (website). See
“Pregnancy & Childbirth” – “Choosing the Midwife Center”, “What to
Expect”, “Birth Options”, and “The Center”
• “National Birth Center Study II” (American Association of Birth Centers)

12

Final Papers Due: by noon on Tuesday, May 9

13

