Carnegie Mellon University
Dietrich College

Information Systems
INFORMATION SYSTEMS MILIEUX (67-250)

Course Description and Syllabus

   

instructor: | Term: Fall 208
Office: | Class Meeting Days: Tuesdays and Thursdays
' Email: i Class Meeting Time: | 3:00-4:20 PM

if
Office Hours: | By appointment | Class Location: | HHB131

COURSE DESCRIPTION

- Information systems (IS) are changing. work practices, reshaping organizations, transforming
cultures, and giving new.meaning to the ways we see the world. This course is designed to help
students understand the role of IS in the-enterprise and the means by which these systems are
created, utilized and maintained. The course will focus on enterprise information architecture
including the components of enterprise strategy, business, application, information, and
infrastructure layers. This course provides not only a framework for understanding information
systems, but also a language to identify.their dynamic complexities and interdependencies.

Topics include: enterprise systems and integration, gaining competitive advantage with IS, business
process reengineering and change management, structured approaches to the creation of IS, project
management, eCommerce, mobile computing and the digital economy, front-end web development,
database design and modeling, decisions support systems, information security and privacy, and the
implications of IS for people, enterprises and society.

This course will use a combination of lectures, class discussions, reading assignments, case studies,
group projects, and “hands-on” work.

OBJECTIVES AND LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon successful completion of the course, students will have gained an understanding of information

systems and associated topics. Specific learning objectives are:

¢ Identify the fundamental concepts.and key issues of the information systems discipline and
the role of information in the enterprise.

e Describe various information systems within an enterprise view including the enterprise
strategy, business, application, information, and infrastructure layers.

.e Discuss and analyze linkages between business / organization process and information
strategy and how enterprises can achieve competitive advantage with strategic deployments

of IS.

'«  Analyze-enterprise case studies that focus on issues of the strategic value of IS in order to
evaluate costs, benefits, and risks of projects and determine the effectiveness of different
applications or technologies in a particular context.

« Apply structured approaches and techniques to design and build a front-end web prototype.
e Design and build a database and analyze information for enterprise decision-making.

e Demonstrate your responsibilities and contributions in a team-based environment based
upon pre-negotiated group timelines, roles and deliverables.

67-250 COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUS | 1COURSE MATERIALS .
- Assigned reading materials should be read prior to class. Class lectures and discussions will proceed

with supplemental and advanced topics, which could be difficult to understand unless you have read
the assigned material, Readings are listed in the schedule section. All necessary updates and/or
changes to the course will be reflected in Blackboard.

Required Text

Managing and Using Information Systems: A Strategic Approach
By: Keri E. Pearlson and Carol S. Saunders

ISBN-13: 978-1118281734, Fifth Edition, 2012, Wiley Publishing

Required Readings
Additional required readings will be assigned during the semester.
These readings will consist of electronic PDFs articles (available in Blackboard).

 

COURSE EVALUATION ,
In order to successfully pass the course, students will be expected to complete the activities listed

below. Weights indicate the contribution to the final course grade.

Attendance, Homework Assignments, In-Class Activities and Quizzes (15%): This component of
the final grade is based upon your contribution to the class in the form of: attendance, homework
assignments, class attendance, activities, and quizzes. Activities not completed during course time
will be due at the beginning of the following class. Any number of unannounced quizzes may be
given during the semester at the beginning of class or at the end of class. A quiz may cover material
from the assigned reading, any previous class period, or the current class period. In-class activities

and quizzes cannot be made up.

Case Studies {10%): This component of the final grade is based on reading and critiquing two
business case studies {worth 5% each).

Development Projects (20%): This component of the final grade is based upon two development
projects - a front-end web development project and a database analysis and design project (worth

10% each}.

Term Project (15%): This component of the final grade is based upon a group project in which you
will work in small teams of 4 to 5 people to address a business case study featuring the application of
an emerging technology to solve a business problem or create a new business model {worth 15%).

Examinations (40%): This component of the final grade is based upon performance on two
individual examinations. Both exams are mandatory. The examination will cover both reading and
class discussions and will be closed book. The exams will be non-cumulative. .

Other Items: Other factors, such as class and group participation and punctual, regular attendance
may be used, at the professor’s discretion, to make adjustments to final grades in borderline cases.
The instructor will assume that you are well prepared for class each week and will feel free to call

upon you.

2 ; 67-250 COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUSGrading Scale: The following criteria provide guaranteed letter grades if a student's overall scores
fail within the stated range:

Grading Scale Interpretation

 

0~ 59% R

90-100% A_ | Excellent, exceeds average understanding as evidenced in course work and
. | goes well beyond the basics.

80-89% .B Far above average, fully meets average understanding as evidenced in course
i work and fully understands the basics and can deal with concepts somewhat
| beyond that level. .

70 - 79% Cj Average, meets minimum expectations and satisfies course requirements.

60-69%  D_ | Below average, meets many minimum expectations and satisfies all or most
| course requirements.
Fails to meet minimum expectations in understanding and course work as

evidenced by performance and submission of graded elements.

COURSE AND UNIVERSITY POLICIES

Attendance and Preparation for Class: You are expected to attend all scheduled class sessions with
your reading and supplementary materials. Readings are to be completed prior to class.

Participation in Class Discussions: Class participation is a very important part of the learning
process in this course. Although not explicitly graded, you will be evaluated on the QUALITY of your
contributions and insights. Quality comments possess one or more of the following properties:

e Offers a different and unique, but relevant, perspective

° Contributes to moving the discussion and analysis forward

e Builds on other comments

0 Transcends the “I feel” syndrome.. That is, it includes some evidence, argumentation, or

recognition of inherent tradeoffs. In other words, the comment demonstrates some
reflective thinking.
Laptops and handheld devices can ONLY be used for classroom purposes when directed by the
instructor. Misuse of laptops or handheld devices will be considered a breach of discipline and

appropriate action will be initiated by the instructor.

Absences: Absence from class is inexcusable and will result in a reduction in your performance
evaluation. In the event you have an excused absence from class (e.g. a job interview) you must
contact the instructor ahead of time. In this situation, get a “classroom buddy” who is willing to fill
you in on the class that you missed.

Assignments: In both the professional and academic world, you must meet deadlines. In this class,
all projects are due at the beginning of class on the dates indicated on the syllabus, unless otherwise
stated. Assignments handed in or emailed after class has begun will be considered late.

Late Assignments: Most assignments will be discussed in class on the due date, therefore late
assignments will not receive credit. It is expected that all work will be submitted on time. In a few
cases and announced in class, assignments will be assessed a 10% penalty each day they are late.
The late penalty increases linearly with lateness: each day after the due date, an additional 10% is
subtracted from the score. So, if you submit a perfect assignment a day late, you earn 100% - 10% =
90%; two days late, you earn 100% - 20% = 80% and so forth. No credit will be given for assignments

turned in more than five days past the due date.

‘ Equipment failure is not an acceptable reason for turning in an assignment late. You should always
make a backup of your files. You should make sure you print out your work early enough that you
can find an alternate location to print, if necessary.

67-250 COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUS { 3Exams: Appropriate documentary evidence certified by the Division of Student Affairs is required
for missing a critical activity or due date. Exams missed due to an excused absence {arranged with
the professor ahead of time) must be made up within one week for full credit or no credit will be
given. Documentation proving the excused absence will be required before or during the time the
exam is made up. Exams missed due to an unexcused absence cannot be made up.

Academic Integrity: CMU students are expected to follow the ethical guidelines and cheating and
plagiarism policies defined in the The Word, Please read it carefully! You will be held accountable for
violations of these guidelines and policies that come to my attention.

Cheating and plagiarism are defined in the CMU Student Handbook, and include (1) submitting work
that is not your own for papers, assignments, or exams; (2) copying ideas, words, or graphics from a
published or unpublished source without appropriate citation; (3) submitting or using falsified data;
and (4) submitting the same work for credit in two courses without prior consent of both instructors. °
Any student who is found cheating or plagiarizing on any work for this course will receive no credit
for that work. Further action will also be taken if necessary.

While I encourage you to be helpful to your classmates, you must understand that the work you turn
in for evaluation or credit must be your own. You are welcome to talk with-other students about
general course content, requirements, and technology issues. You are not welcome to offer, or to ask
for, substantial, material assistance to, or from, other students in completing specific aspects of
graded assignments for individual credit. If there is any doubt in your mind about a particular
situation, ask yourself this question: "How would | feel if I observed another student or students
engaging in this particular behavior?” Any student who turns in work for credit that is identical or
similar beyond coincidence, to that of another student (current or past) may face appropriate
disciplinary action at the department, college, or university level.

Content copied from the Internet and reproduced verbatim in assignments or other submissions will
be treated as plagiarized material, even if the source is cited. More information at:

http://www.cmu.edu/policies/documents/Academic%20Integrity.htm.

An Invitation to Students with Learning Disabilities: Carnegie Mellon University is committed to
providing reasonable accommodations for all persons with disabilities, Students with disabilities
who need accommodations in this course must contact the professor at the beginning of the semester
to discuss needed accommodations. Students who need accommodations must be registered with
Disability Resources at 102 Whitfield Hall 412.268.2013, or with Larry Powell, Equal Opportunity

Services Manager, at: lpowell@andrew.cmu.edu.

Contacting the Instructor: The easiest and most reliable way to get in touch with me is by e-mail.
Feel free to send me e-mail if you have a question related to the course. I will respond as soon as I can
but not always instantaneously. Besides that, you are also welcome to stop by my office any time to
discuss the class. Please understand that I may not be free to talk to you at that time, but, in that
event, we can make an appointment for a later time that is mutually convenient.

4 67-250 COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUS